---
layout: post
title: "The Windows Operating System"
date: 2022-02-04
---

### The Windows Operating System

Microsoft first introduced the Windows operating system on November 20, 1985. The first version of Windows was a graphical operating system shell for MS-DOS. Later versions of Windows Desktop introduced the Windows File Manager, Program Manager, and Print Manager programs.

Windows 95 was the first full integration of Windows and DOS and offered built-in Internet support for the first time. This version also debuted the Internet Explorer web browser. Since the initial version, there have been over a dozen versions of Windows released, such as Windows XP, Vista, and 8, up to the current version: Windows 10. Over time, Microsoft has offered various editions of each Windows Desktop release catering to everyone from casual consumers to enterprise customers.

Windows Server was first released in 1993 with the release of Windows NT 3.1 Advanced Server. Windows NT saw several updates over the years, adding in technologies such as Internet Information Services (IIS), various networking protocols, Administrative Wizards to facilitate admin tasks, and more. With the release of Windows 2000, Microsoft debuted Active Directory, originally intended to help sysadmins set up file sharing, data encryption, VPNs, etc. Windows Server 2000 also included the Microsoft Management Console (MMC) and supported dynamic disk volumes.

Windows Server 2003 came next with server roles, a built-in firewall, the Volume Shadow Copy Service, and more. Windows Server 2008 included failover clustering, Hyper-V virtualization software, Server Core, Event Viewer, and major enhancements to Active Directory. Over the years, Microsoft released further Server versions, including Server 2012, Server 2016, and most recently, Server 2019. This latest version added support for Kubernetes, Linux containers, and more advanced security features.

As new versions of Windows are introduced, older versions are deprecated and no longer receive Microsoft updates (unless a long-term support contract is purchased in some cases). Windows Server 2008 and 2012 reached end of life for security updates on January 14, 2020. Currently, only Server 2012 R2 and later are in support. However, Microsoft has released out-of-band patches for earlier versions of Windows in the past few years due to the discovery of the critical SMBv1 vulnerability (EternalBlue).

Many versions of Windows are now deemed "legacy" and are no longer supported. Organizations often find themselves running various older operating systems to support critical applications or due to operational or budgetary concerns. An assessor needs to understand the differences between versions and the various misconfigurations and vulnerabilities inherent to each.
Windows Versions

The following is a list of the major Windows operating systems and associated version numbers:
Operating System Names 	Version Number
Windows NT 4 	4.0
Windows 2000 	5.0
Windows XP 	5.1
Windows Server 2003, 2003 R2 	5.2
Windows Vista, Server 2008 	6.0
Windows 7, Server 2008 R2 	6.1
Windows 8, Server 2012 	6.2
Windows 8.1, Server 2012 R2 	6.3
Windows 10, Server 2016, Server 2019 	10.0
